============
Kay tutorial
============

Preparation
-----------

Install following stuff:

  * Python-2.7.x
  * App Engine SDK/Python 1.6+
  * Kay Framework
  * ipython (recommended)

If you retreive Kay from the repository, you need to install also:

  * mercurial

You can retreive source code of Kay as follows.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ hg clone https://kay-framework.googlecode.com/hg/ kay

If you use released stable version, you can download the latest
released tarball from
http://code.google.com/p/kay-framework/downloads/list and unpack it as
follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ tar zxvf kay-VERSION.tar.gz

If you have installed a zip version of appengine SDK, please create a
symbolic link as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ sudo ln -s /some/where/google_appengine /usr/local/google_appengine    

If you have used an installer of appengine SDK, you don't need to
create the symlink.

Quick start
-----------

Starting a new project
======================

To start a new project, you can use ``manage.py`` script offered by
Kay for creating a skelton of your project. After that, you're
supposed to use a newly created ``manage.py`` script in the project
directory for managing this project(including deployment, testing,
i18n translation work, etc, etc..).

.. code-block:: bash

   $ python kay/manage.py startproject myproject
   $ tree myproject
   myproject
   |-- app.yaml
   |-- kay -> /Users/tmatsuo/work/tmp/kay/kay
   |-- manage.py -> /Users/tmatsuo/work/tmp/kay/manage.py
   |-- settings.py
   `-- urls.py

   1 directory, 4 files

On platforms that supports symbolic link, two symbolic link for a
directory ``kay`` and a file ``manage.py`` are created.

Creating an application
=======================

With kay, you need to create at least one application in your project.

Change directory into the newly created ``myproject`` directory, and
create your first application. In an example bellow, an application
named ``myapp`` is created.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ cd myproject
   $ python manage.py startapp myapp
   $ tree myapp
   myapp
   |-- __init__.py
   |-- models.py
   |-- templates
   |   `-- index.html
   |-- urls.py
   `-- views.py

   1 directory, 5 files

After creating an application, you need to edit ``settings.py`` for
registering your application to the project.

First, please add ``myapp`` to a tuple ``settings.INSTALLED_APPS``. If
necessary, you can configure which URL to mount this application by
setting a dictionary ``APP_MOUNT_POINTS``. An example below shows how
to mount your application at a URL '/'.

settings.py

.. code-block:: python

  INSTALLED_APPS = (
    'kay.auth',
    'myapp',
  )

  APP_MOUNT_POINTS = {
    'myapp': '/',
  }

Unless setting ``APP_MOUNT_POINTS``, the application will be mounted
at a URL derived from the application name like ``/myapp``. 

In the example above, as you see, we added another application named
``kay.auth`` for later use.

Running your application
========================

Let's run your first application. You can run the development server
by following command.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ python manage.py runserver
  Running on Kay-2.1.0
  INFO     2012-01-02 16:47:14,832 appengine_rpc.py:159] Server: appengine.google.com
  [...]
  INFO     2012-01-02 16:47:15,387 dev_appserver_multiprocess.py:638] Running application myprojectappid on port 8080: http://localhost:8080
  INFO     2012-01-02 16:47:15,388 dev_appserver_multiprocess.py:640] Admin console is available at: http://localhost:8080/_ah/admin


You will see just 'Hello' on your browser by accessing
http://localhost:8080/.


Deployment
==========

Before looking into the code, let's deploy this project to
appspot. First, you need to edit ``app.yaml`` and set your ``appid``
as ``application``. After that, please do as follows.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ python manage.py appcfg update

In case you're asked for a username and password, please type in your
credentials here. After successful deployment, you can access your
application at http://your-appid.appspot.com/.


Quick look into the app skelton
-------------------------------

myapp/urls.py
=============

First, here is a default ``urls.py``. You can configure a mapping
between URLs and your views here.

myapp/urls.py:

.. code-block:: python

   from kay.routing import (
     ViewGroup, Rule
   )

   view_groups = [
     ViewGroup(
       Rule('/', endpoint='index', view='myapp.views.index'),
     )
   ]

In the ``Rule`` line, there is a mapping like '/' ->
'myapp.views.index'.

myapp/views.py
==============

Basically, you are supposed to write your logic here.

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
   """
   myapp.views
   """

   """
   import logging

   from google.appengine.api import users
   from google.appengine.api import memcache
   from werkzeug import (
     unescape, redirect, Response,
   )
   from werkzeug.exceptions import (
     NotFound, MethodNotAllowed, BadRequest
   )

   from kay.utils import (
     render_to_response, reverse,
     get_by_key_name_or_404, get_by_id_or_404,
     to_utc, to_local_timezone, url_for, raise_on_dev
   )
   from kay.i18n import gettext as _
   from kay.auth.decorators import login_required

   """

   from kay.utils import render_to_response


   # Create your views here.

   def index(request):
     return render_to_response('myapp/index.html', {'message': 'Hello'})

In the beginning of this file, there are import examples which you may
often use, so you can copy/paste these lines if you need. In the body,
there is a view function.

Basically, with Kay, you're supposed to write functions for
implementing application logics. Actually, view can be an object which
has a __call__() method (that means callable), but in this tutorial,
we define just functions for a time being.

index(request):

   View functions must be receive a ``Request`` object as its first
   argument. According to your configuration, a view function can have
   additional keyword argument, though index() method here is not.

   View functions must return a ``Response`` object. In the first
   example, we use a function ``render_to_response`` which is for
   creating a ``Response`` object from an html template and context
   values.


myapp/templates/index.html
==========================

The last one is an html template.

.. code-block:: html

   <!DOCTYPE html>
   <html>
   <head>
   <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
   <title>Top Page - myapp</title>
   </head>
   <body>
   {{ message }}
   </body>
   </html>

The template engine which is used in Kay is jinja2 (available from GAE platform). Please remember
following two things about jinja2 first.

* To display a context value passed from your view, wrap a name of the
  value with ``{{}}``. You can call functions by adding
  parenthesis(and of course you can add arguments inside the
  parenthessis) as well as just displaying the value.

* You can use ``{% %}`` style tags for describing control structures and commands to jinja2 like ``{% if ... %} {% else %} {% endif %}``,  for loops, and ``{% extends "base_templates.html" %}``.

Here is an example usage of ``{% if %}``.

.. code-block:: html

   <!DOCTYPE html>
   <html>
   <head>
   <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
   <title>Top Page - myapp</title>
   </head>
   <body>
   {% if message %}
     <div id="message">
       {{ message }}
     </div>
   {% endif %}
   </body>
   </html>

In above example, we wrap a displaying part of a message with a 'div',
and using ``{% if %}`` allows us to display the message div only when
the message has a certain value.

Please keep in mind these two syntaxes for the time being.

Authentication
--------------

To enable the user authentication feature, you need to install a
middleware for authentication. Kay has various authentication
backends. We'll use an authentication backend for Google Account in
this tutorial.

Configuration
=============

First, you need to add ``MIDDLEWARE_CLASES`` including
``kay.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware``. 

.. code-block:: python

   MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES = (
     'kay.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware',
   )

Don't forget the comma after the middleware definition because when a
tuple has only one element, you need to place a comma after the
element explicitly.

After that, the auth module certainly work properly, I'd recommend you
define a model for storing information of a user. If you want to have
additional information later and so on, you can easily do this by your
own model.

If you use the authentication against Google Account and you want to
define own model, you need to extend ``kay.auth.models.GoogleUser``
and set the name of this extended model to
``settings.AUTH_USER_MODEL`` as a string.

myapp.models:

.. code-block:: python

   from google.appengine.ext import db
   from kay.auth.models import GoogleUser

   class MyUser(GoogleUser):
     pass

settings.py

.. code-block:: python

   AUTH_USER_MODEL = 'myapp.models.MyUser'


How to use
==========

request.user
++++++++++++

Once you enable the authentication middleware, it will add ``user``
attribute to the request object. If a user visiting web sites are
signed in, the content of the user attribute is an entity of the User
model, otherwise an instance of a class
``kay.auth.models.AnonymousUser``.

Here are common attributes and methods between those classes.

* is_admin

  This attribute indicates if the user is an administrator as a
  boolean value.

* is_anonymous()

  This method returns False if the user is signed in, otherwise, True.

* is_authenticated()

  This method returns True if the user is signed in, otherwise, False.


An example usage in template
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Let's put a fragment of code like following.

.. code-block:: html

   <div id="greeting">
     {% if request.user.is_anonymous() %}
       <a href="{{ create_login_url() }}">login</a>
     {% else %}
       Hello {{ request.user }}! <a href="{{ create_logout_url() }}">logout</a>
     {% endif %}
   </div>

This part of code will show a link for the login screen if the user
doesn't sign in, otherwise, a link for signing out.

Decorators
++++++++++

To protect a page from anonymous access, you can use following
decorators.  You can use ``kay.auth.decorators.login_required`` for
the page needs just an authorization and can use
``kay.auth.decorators.admin_required`` if the page has an admin
restriction.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

   from kay.utils import render_to_response
   from kay.auth.decorators import login_required

   # Create your views here.

   @login_required
   def index(request):
     return render_to_response('myapp/index.html', {'message': 'Hello'})

Let's confirm that you're recested to sign in when accessing the index
page.


Guestbook implementation - Step 1
---------------------------------

In this tutorial, we're gonna create a simple guestbook. I will
introduce various features as much as possible thorough out the
tutorial.

Firstly, let's look through a basic usage of Models ans Forms.

Model Definition
================

To define models, you can basically use appengine's db module
directly. Additionally there are special properties in ``kay.db``
package.

Here is a simple model for the guestbook.

myapp/models.py:

.. code-block:: python

   from google.appengine.ext import db
   from kay.auth.models import GoogleUser
   import kay.db

   # ...

   class Comment(db.Model):
     user = kay.db.OwnerProperty()
     body = db.TextProperty(required=True)
     created = db.DateTimeProperty(auto_now_add=True)

``kay.db.OwnerProperty`` which is difined in an attribute ``user`` is
a property specially offerred by Kay. This is a property for storing a
key of a user who sines in automatically.

``body`` is a property for storing comment body itself, and
``created`` stores a date at which the comment is created
automatically.


Form definition
===============

Next, let's create a form for comment submission. Certainly you can
write an html form directly in your html templates, considering a
validation, I'd recommend you to create your form by using
``kay.utils.forms`` package.

There is no restriction about where to define your forms though,
``myapp/forms.py`` is one of appropriate places.

myapp/forms.py:

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

   from kay.utils import forms

   class CommentForm(forms.Form):
     body = forms.TextField("Your Comment", required=True)

You can define a form by creating a class that extends
``kay.utils.forms.Form``. In this example, ``body`` is an instance of
``form.TextField`` class. The first argument will become a label of a
generated form. If you specify ``required`` as True, the field will be
a mandatry field.

For more details about this form library, please refer to a `document
<http://kay-docs-jp.shehas.net/forms_reference.html>`_ about
``kay.utils.forms`` package.


View definition
===============

Let's write a view with these models and forms.

myapp/views.py:

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
   """
   myapp.views
   """

   from werkzeug import redirect

   from kay.utils import (
     render_to_response, url_for
   )
   from kay.auth.decorators import login_required

   from myapp.models import Comment
   from myapp.forms import CommentForm

   # Create your views here.

   @login_required
   def index(request):
     form = CommentForm()
     if request.method == "POST" and form.validate(request.form):
       comment = Comment(body=form['body'])
       comment.put()
       return redirect(url_for('myapp/index'))
     return render_to_response('myapp/index.html',
			       {'form': form.as_widget()})

You can see the new import statement of four lines:
``werkzeug.redirect``, ``kay.utils.url_for``, and newly created models
and forms. You can see that this view creates a form and validate
values from a form if the request method is POST.

After the validation succeeds, this view creates a new entity of
``Comment``, and redirect to the top page.

``url_for`` is a function for URL reverse lookup, and returns a URL
for an endpoint which is given as an argument. Let's look back the
default urls.py.

.. code-block:: python

   view_groups = [
     ViewGroup(
       Rule('/', endpoint='index', view='myapp.views.index'),
     )
   ]

In this ``urls.py``, we set 'index' as an endpoint. Hawever, when it
comes to reverse lookup, we used 'myapp/index'. Actually Kay adds an
application name and a slash to an endpoint automatically in order to
avoid conflicts between endpoints from multiple applications.

So, you need to specify an endpoint like ``app_name/endpoint``.


Template
========

.. code-block:: html

   <!DOCTYPE html>
   <html>
   <head>
   <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
   <title>Top Page - myapp</title>
   </head>
   <body>
     <div id="greeting">
       {% if request.user.is_anonymous() %}
	 <a href="{{ create_login_url() }}">login</a>
       {% else %}
	 Hello {{ request.user }}! <a href="{{ create_logout_url() }}">logout</a>
       {% endif %}
     </div>

     <div id="main_form">
       {{ form()|safe }}
     </div>
   </body>
   </html>

Now you can store comments submitted from the form to the datastore.

Let's try submitting on the development server. After submitting some
comments, you can visit http://localhost:8080/_ah/admin for viewing
contents of the datastore.


Guestbook implementation - Step 2
---------------------------------

In the current implementation, if you submit comments, you can not see
the changes. So let's display the latest 20 comments on the top page.

Using queries
=============

myapp/views.py:

.. code-block:: python

   ITEMS_PER_PAGE = 20

   # Create your views here.

   @login_required
   def index(request):
     form = CommentForm()
     if request.method == "POST" and form.validate(request.form):
       comment = Comment(body=form['body'])
       comment.put()
       return redirect(url_for('myapp/index'))
     query = Comment.all().order('-created')
     comments = query.fetch(ITEMS_PER_PAGE)
     return render_to_response('myapp/index.html',
			       {'form': form.as_widget(),
				'comments': comments})

The code above passes the latest 20 comments to a template.

Looping in a template
=====================

Let's display the comments in the template.

myapp/templates/index.html:

.. code-block:: html

  {% if comments %}
    <div id="comment_list">
      <ul>
      {% for comment in comments %}
        <li>{{ comment.body }}
          <span class="author"> by {{ comment.user }}</span>
      {% endfor %}
      </ul>
    </div>
  {% endif %}

Please add the code above to the template and put it under the part
which displays the form. Now you can see the latest 20 comments.

Guestbook implementation - Step 3
---------------------------------

Let's add a capability for selecting a category from a list of
categories which are pre-defined.


Using ModelForm
===============

First, please create a model for storing categories and add a property
for storing a category to the ``Comment`` class.

myapp/models.py:

.. code-block:: python

   class Category(db.Model):
     name = db.StringProperty(required=True)

     def __unicode__(self):
       return self.name

   class Comment(db.Model):
     user = kay.db.OwnerProperty()
     category = db.ReferenceProperty(Category, collection_name='comments')
     body = db.StringProperty(required=True, verbose_name=u'Your Comment')
     created = db.DateTimeProperty(auto_now_add=True)

Next, to maintain both of models and forms is a bit cumbersome, so you
can use a feature for creating models automatically from model
definitions to avoid this.

To do this, please create a form extended from
``kay.utils.forms.modelform.ModelForm``.

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

   from kay.utils import forms
   from kay.utils.forms.modelform import ModelForm

   from myapp.models import Comment

   class CommentForm(ModelForm):
     class Meta:
       model = Comment
       exclude = ('user', 'created')

First, you need to define a class extended from ``ModelForm`` and
define an inner class named ``Meta`` inside of the class. There are
several class attributes for configuring your ModelForm as follows:

* model

  define a model class which a new form will be based on.

* exclude

  define properties which you want to exclude from a form as
  tuple. This ``exclude`` and the next ``fields`` are mutually
  exclusive. You can define only one of them at a time.

* fields

  define properties which you want to include in a form as tuple.

* help_texts

  define help texts which will be displayed with forms as a dictionary
  with field names as keys.


Lastly, you need to change how to save your entity in your myapp/views.py.

.. code-block:: python

       comment = Comment(body=form['body'])
       comment.put()

Change above these lines in myapp/views.py to as follows:

.. code-block:: python

       comment = form.save()


Custom management scripts
=========================

For now, you can see a form for selectiong a category, but there's no
Category entity in the datastore, so the created select box has no
candidate. Let's create a custom management script which will add
categories to the datastore.

Please add a file named ``myapp/management.py`` with following content.

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

   from google.appengine.ext import db

   from kay.management.utils import (
     print_status, create_db_manage_script
   )
   from myapp.models import Category

   categories = [
     u'Programming',
     u'Testing',
     u'Management',
   ]

   def create_categories():
     entities = []
     for name in categories:
       entities.append(Category(name=name))
     db.put(entities)
     print_status("Categories are created successfully.")

   def delete_categories():
     db.delete(Category.all().fetch(100))
     print_status("Categories are deleted successfully.")

   action_create_categories = create_db_manage_script(
     main_func=create_categories, clean_func=delete_categories,
     description="Create 'Category' entities")


Then, please add following lines to your ``app.yaml``.

.. code-block:: yaml

   builtins:
   - remote_api: on


After that, you can see following entries in the output of the command
``manage.py``::

  create_categories:
    Create 'Category' entities

    -a, --appid                   string    
    -h, --host                    string    
    -p, --path                    string    
    --no-secure
    -c, --clean

You can add 3 entities of ``Category`` as follows:

* against appspot

.. code-block:: bash

  $ python manage.py create_categories

* against devserver

.. code-block:: bash

  $ python manage.py create_categories -h localhost:8080 --no-secure

Please add 3 entities of ``Category``, and access your application
again. Can you see 3 candidates in the select box?

.. Note::

   For more details about how to create custom management scripts,
   refer to `Adding your own management script
   <http://kay-docs.shehas.net/manage_py.html#adding-your-own-management-script>`_


Displaying category
===================

The code bellow allows you to show categories on the comment list page.

.. code-block:: python

     {% if comments %}
       <div id="comment_list">
	 <ul>
	 {% for comment in comments %}
	   <li>{{ comment.body }}
	     <span class="author"> by {{ comment.user }}</span>
	     {% if comment.category %}
	       <br>
	       <span class="category"> in {{ comment.category.name }}</span>
	     {% endif %}
	 {% endfor %}
	 </ul>
       </div>
     {% endif %}


Automatic CRUD creation
=======================

Let's create pages for managing the categories. Here, we're gonna
create pages for adding/deleting/modifying categories restricted only
to admins.

First, create a form for ``Category``.

myapp/forms.py:

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

   from kay.utils import forms
   from kay.utils.forms.modelform import ModelForm

   from myapp.models import (
     Comment, Category
   )

   class CommentForm(ModelForm):
     class Meta:
       model = Comment
       exclude = ('user', 'created')

   class CategoryForm(ModelForm):
     class Meta:
       model = Category

Import ``Category`` and create a new form named ``CategoryForm``.

Next, edit ``myapp/urls.py`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   from kay.generics import admin_required
   from kay.generics import crud
   from kay.routing import (
     ViewGroup, Rule
   )

   class CategoryCRUDViewGroup(crud.CRUDViewGroup):
     model = 'myapp.models.Category'
     form = 'myapp.forms.CategoryForm'
     authorize = admin_required

   view_groups = [
     ViewGroup(
       Rule('/', endpoint='index', view='myapp.views.index'),
     ),
     CategoryCRUDViewGroup(),
   ]

Lastly, add ``kay.utils.flash.FlashMiddleware`` to
``settings.MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES = (
     'kay.auth.middleware.AuthenticationMiddleware',
     'kay.utils.flash.FlashMiddleware',
   )

You can see a list of categories at: http://localhost:8080/category/list 

.. Note::

   For more details about CRUD creation, refer to `Using generic view
   groups <http://kay-docs.shehas.net/generic_views.html>`_.


Cascade deletion with db_hook
=============================

As you may notice, if you delete a category which has one or more
comments in it, an error occurs when displaying those comments.

Here, we will use ``db_hook`` feature for implementing cascade
deletion.

If you got the error I mentioned above, please delete comments in
question, or stop a development server once, and restart it with
``-c`` option, and create desired entities again before going further.

First, you need to enable ``db_hook`` feature in the ``settings.py``.

.. code-block:: python

   USE_DB_HOOK = True

Next, register your hook function in ``myapp/__init__.py`` as follows:

myapp/__init__.py:

.. code-block:: python

   # -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
   # Kay application: myapp

   from google.appengine.ext import db

   from kay.utils.db_hook import register_pre_delete_hook

   from myapp.models import (
     Comment, Category
   )

   def cascade_delete(key):
     entities = Comment.all(keys_only=True).filter('category =', key).fetch(2000)
     db.delete(entities)

   register_pre_delete_hook(cascade_delete, Category)

In above example, cascade deletion is implemented in a very ad-hoc
way, so you might need to implement it more carefully if in production
code.

Then, if you delete any category, all the comments that belongs to the
category should be deleted.

.. Note::

   For more details about db_hook feature, refer to `Using db_hook
   feature <http://kay-docs.shehas.net/db_hook.html>`_.

